to be sure that it's working, preparing for an interview with Bill Barzak this afternoon.
This is October 4th.
We're in the Evans Library looking out on a slightly hazy morning, and I have the pleasant opportunity to interview Bobby Beiser.
about his student experiences here.
Bobby, now say a sentence so we'll test the mic.
Bobby Beiser, Texas A&M University.
How's that?
That's good.
Okay.
Bobby, to introduce yourself to this recording, would you describe your background and experience before you came here as a student?
Where did you grow up?
How long had your family been there?
Any special experiences you had before coming here?
Sure.
Actually, I'm a native Bryanite.
I grew up and was raised in Bryan.
I went to elementary school or public schools in Bryan.
And so Texas A&M was always Texas A&M and had family attend here.
In fact, my aunt was one of the first African-American females to attend.
She attended the summer of 63.
And I've had also an uncle.
who attended and actually did his bachelor's degree here.
And so I'd always had a desire to come to Texas A&M.
Already you have my excitement in high gear.
Your aunt was here in 63, so that was the first summer
Right.
Of any integration.
So does she still live here?
She passed away about a year ago, about a couple years ago now, and so did not really realize
Just learning here recently about the history surrounding her coming to Texas A&M, it's pretty interesting.
And largely, again, General Rutter made a decision about integrating and wanted to start by identifying African Americans in the community who were interested in Texas A&M, and she was actually enrolled at Prairie View.
and was recruited to come for that summer, that very first critical summer.
Let's divert on her and anything you've heard her say.
Do you know who helped identify her?
We're not for certain.
She was very much involved as a high school senior at what I guess would have been Kemp High School.
So very much involved, an honor student there, and our family has had a history of being involved.
I'd like to believe that particularly because my family was involved in the integration of the local school district, Bryan ISD, that my uncle Dolly Beiser was a great influence and a part of the discussions about integrating the campus.
I could not imagine that happening without him.
What was her name?
Barbara Beiser.
Barbara?
Mm-hmm.
And she came as what year was she in school?
I believe she was, I believe it was her junior year at, let's see, would have been 63.
No, actually it would have been her, likely been her freshman year at Prairie View.
So it was either the summer before she left to go to Prairie View or the summer following her first year at Prairie View.
And she was here only that summer?
Only that summer.
do you remember anything she said about her summer plus or minus?
Not really.
I don't remember her talking about it a great deal.
She just would say, you know, as I was trying to make up my mind about where I wanted to go, she encouraged me to go because she thought it was a good program.
But I don't think it was the right program for her at that right time.
I think the atmosphere and obviously at Purview was, I think, a better environment for her at that time.
I was part of the Aspirations Committee.
I was the secretary.
So I'm the one that wrote that report that recommended those comparatively important changes, integration, co-education, non-compulsory core, changing the admission requirements.
And Mr. Rudder handled integration, well, he handled it all well, but he handled integration superbly because it was done for the first time in the summer.
And therefore, when fall came and some student group might have, if they'd wanted to, tried to organize, say it wouldn't work, it already had worked splendidly all summer, and so there were no problem.
All right, so you graduated from high school in what year?
1982.
82.
From Bryan High School.
And I don't need to ask you, when did you first visit the campus?
Because you don't remember, you were probably so young.
Ah, very.
In fact, we would quite often come to campus for football games, so our athletic events.
And so that was the initial introduction, and then a little
A little later on, obviously, the academics became of interest to me here.
And having been in Bryan Public Schools, a large portion of the student body, the college-going students from Bryan and Consolidated decide to come here to Texas A&M.
And so that's the fall of what?
That would have been a fall of 82.
82.
And you applied.
Were there any difficulties in admission or anything like that that you recall?
No, not at all.
I was somewhat, though, amazed that there was not a big recruitment effort on camp and the local community.
Not just for me.
It seemed like the recruiting effort was largely focused on those students that may have been National Merit Scholars, but there were others of us who were good students
who we were not actively recruited as we were by other universities.
I recall, as I was trying to make up my mind about what I wanted to do, I recall getting a scholarship application from my counselor and she just sent me a note and sent this to one of my classrooms, I guess my homeroom,
And it just said, complete it and return it to me.
And I was like, well, I thought it was a commitment to A&M, and I did not know whether I wanted to commit to A&M.
I had, well, I wanted to come here.
I also had this burning desire to go to a historically black college.
I was particularly interested in going to Morehouse.
because of Morehouse's rich history of, you know, civil rights leaders attending there and
And so I was kind of excited about that.
And then I thought, well, this is a commitment that I'm not willing to make yet.
And so I just, I didn't fill out the application.
It was for the Presidential Achievement Scholarship Program.
And I didn't fill it out.
And that turned out to be it was okay, because fortunately I lived at home and we could afford for me to go and I could work and able to get some loans.
And between all of that, then I was able to pay my way through school.
I just found it interesting that there was not a recruiting, there was not a great deal of recruiting happening in the high schools, local high schools.
So your first fall, you took a full-time load.
What was the routine for advice and counseling on what courses to take?
Oh man, I did not actually, I don't remember, I think I pretty much figured it out myself, except
I did get into trouble academically and then sought out help when I decided I was going to be a liberal arts major.
And I remember the person that I came into contact with there was Mary Broussard, who was, I believe she was director of the counselor, the academic advisors for the college for liberal arts.
And really, that got me back on track.
I came to A&M with very poor study skills, but I was an honor society student, and Brian Hyde, but I had poor study skills.
And so they started, I mean, she talked to me about taking classes that would actually help me with my study skills, which would prepare me to be much more competitive in the classroom a little later on.
and so that was helpful.
Also got some help from upperclassmen.
One person in particular who I believe was a junior and she asked me, she happened to see me in the student center and asked me, we started talking, introduced ourselves, an African-American
female out from Silsby, Texas, and Karen Wright, and Karen asked me what classes was I taking, and I told her what I was taking, and she said, why are you taking biology 113?
Are you a pre-med major?
And I said, no, I thought about being a pre-med major, but I'm not a pre-med major.
And she said, do you understand that?
She said, what is it with you underclassmen?
You don't ask the upperclassmen about what, you don't come to us for advice, and I'm here to help you.
And so I said, well, I've got this big exam in biology 113, and I'm just, I'm really terrified about it.
And so she said, well, tell you what, I've taken it.
We're going back to my residence.
We're going back to my dorm room, and we're going to get you those notes because I've saved them, and we're going to go to the library.
And so she brought me over to the library.
We picked up another underclassman who was taking another course that she had taken, and she brought us over to the library and sat with us, and the three of us just basically studied for this exam.
And she was just an acquaintance?
Just an acquaintance.
Let's see, when you started out, what was your major gonna be?
I originally started out, my major was gonna be pre-med, and then I decided that, and that was not really,
I'd always talked about going off to medical school and becoming a doctor, but really didn't have a passion for it.
It was just kind of the thing that everybody said, oh, you know, you ought to be a doctor, you ought to be a doctor.
So I thought, well, I ought to be a doctor.
And came here and realized, oh, man, there's so much to choose from, so many majors to choose from, so many things I want to do in my life.
And I ended up...
literally kind of by accident falling into sociology, but could not make up my mind what I wanted to do.
So while I had indicated I wanted to be a doctor and wanted to do pre-med, my classes didn't stack up that way.
I wasn't taking the courses that I needed.
It just kind of happened by accident that I ended up declaring another major.
Now back before your freshman year, did you go to fish camp?
Did not go to Fish Camp.
Because I was going to ask what role that played.
All right, your first fall, how easy was it for you to feel you were becoming part of the institution?
Oh, it was difficult the first semester because I had been so actively involved in my high school.
I was student body president at my high school and class president all the previous years.
And so it was a little bit unsettling to come here and not to be the big man on campus.
And so starting out as a freshman, it was just really interesting.
But other than that,
I did not have significant problems, particularly as it relates to racial incidents.
Brian Housel was predominantly white high school, and racial relations were relatively harmonious, at least from my perspective.
I'm jumping to the conclusion that instead of a separationist, you've been a mainstreamer.
most of your life?
I really have.
I don't know if it was virtue of
I would say was largely driven by what was happening, what was going on with me in high school and junior high school relative to academics.
I took the accelerated courses and the college prep courses, and quite frankly, I did not have very many classes with African American students.
In most cases, I was the only one.
I never felt like I was the only one.
I mean, it would just dawn on me some days, oh, okay, well, it was no big deal.
I mean, so I did not come to Texas A&M.
That's part of why I thought about even going to historically black college was that am I missing something out of my academic experience or life experience that I need to do?
And then I just decided, well, no, I don't need to do that.
You lived at home.
Lived at home.
So you drove out here each day?
Drove out here each day.
By yourself, or was there a group?
Nope, drove out here by myself each day.
How did you get a circle of friends, colleagues, buddies?
Well, I did have a good number of my high school friends who came to school here.
And interesting, I was walking through the student center one day, and there was a group of students gathered around the piano, a group of African-American students gathered around the piano, and they were singing gospel music.
And I thought, well, what is going on here?
And so I went in and just kind of sat and watched them.
And as it turns out, it was just the very beginning or the embryo of what's turned out to be the gospel choir here on campus.
And just kind of sat around and started talking to those guys.
And in fact, Karen was a part of that group too.
Karen Wright was a part of that group.
And in fact,
That was also my introduction to the Black Awareness Committee on campus.
And so I immediately got involved in that after being introduced.
So my friends really came from my high school friends who were here and then my new college friends who were largely African American out of that interaction really that very day that I went over there and the choir was practicing.
Describe a typical, for you that freshman year, describe a typical day.
What time did you get up and get here?
What did you do all day?
Gosh, get up and head to campus.
Generally, I had an 8 o'clock class, and so that was always a struggle.
Even though you do it in high school, it's like for some reason in college you're not supposed to have an 8 o'clock class.
But I would come to campus and pretty much go through my routine, go through all my classes.
If I had breaks during class, I'd go to the library or go to the student center and kind of sit and read.
But didn't really develop relationships.
I was feeling lost and feeling
some anxiety about, okay, here I am, now a freshman, and nobody really cares.
But I don't believe it's, that was largely my, largely conclusions that I drew, not
And those conclusions were drawn not from a bad experience, but from no experience.
And I just assumed, well, this place is huge, and so we'll just be sitting around here, and maybe one day when I'm a senior, I'll be able to matter.
But I would eat lunch here, and then at the end of the day, would just go right back home.
Now, when did the day end?
Generally early afternoon, generally early afternoon, and I'd go back home.
I'd go back home or go straight to work because I worked at the mall in Mantares Mall, so I worked
at the music store there and at Musicland and did that and eventually I decided that I would look for a job here on campus and ended up with a part-time job here on campus, here in the library as a matter of fact.
That first year?
No, this would have been probably my junior year.
Do you have any recollection of in round numbers what that first year cost in dollars and cents?
Do you remember any kind of total?
Probably about, for some reason, I just keep saying the $500 on my fee slip.
I generally would take 12 hours, because I was going to work 20.
I always wanted to work at least 20, and sometimes it was 30 hours.
But for some reason, I remember it being $500, $600 a semester, plus another couple hundred dollars for books.
Another couple hundred, another $250 for books.
And you were earning about, you were paying what percentage of those costs?
I got, well, very early on I was paying probably about 20% because I was able to get a grant, a Pell Grant.
And I did not get any loans until a little later on.
I did get emergency loans and I got those only because I was generally late or there was some holdup with my Pell Grant and needed to have my fees paid by the cutoff dates.
And so that's what I would do.
I would take out a short term loan,
pay those off, and then when my grant would come, they'd apply the grant, we'd pay off the loan, and then what was left generally was about $100 left, well, sometimes, and maybe less than that.
Then the rest, I guess I ended up probably paying largely for my books out of my own pocket and then any other expenses that I had.
During that first year, what extracurricular activities or events did you, did you go to Yale practice?
I went to Yale practice, and that was neat.
Went to, so it was largely athletic events.
Bonfire?
Bonfire, went to Bonfire, and that was really neat.
I was trying to remember if there was.
You went to football games.
Went to football games.
largely football and basketball games and bonfire, Yale practice.
That was really about it.
I'm looking at my typical questions.
Describe what you wore to class.
How did you dress?
Oh, very casual.
Jeans and a t-shirt.
What type of shoes?
I was not a big tennis shoe person, so I generally had a pair of very comfortable loafers.
My favorite pair of shoes were my penny loafers.
Any kind of a haircut that was distinctive or anything?
Well, yeah, it was pretty popular then as an African American that you would wear a curl, as we call them.
And it's just a curly perm.
It would curl my hair even more.
So, how did your circle of friends grow?
My circle of friends grew with my involvement on campus, largely with the MSC, because I got involved really through the Black Awareness Committee and I was like, well, what is all this other stuff that's going on here?
And lots of committees to be involved in.
I had always had an interest in politics so I was interested in political forum and then the great issues committee and so I would not be active or I was not a regular member and regular participant but I'd attend their programs or participate in a very small way in planning or bringing a program to campus.
That's not the freshman year.
No, this all happened about, really happened about my sophomore year.
As you look back on it, what could we learn from your experience about how to get freshmen like you today, what could we do today to get them more involved?
Boy, that's a tough one because a lot of it requires some initiative on the part of the individual.
I think when the organizations host their open houses, open house events when they host, rush when they host, all those kinds of activities where students are presented with an opportunity.
I think students will take advantage of it.
It could be that marketing is a big deal where we actually talk more to the students about how positive their experience can be.
Nowadays, I think there is so much more demand on student leaders than there were when I was a student.
I think the demands on their time are significant.
The issues that I think they're tackling with their organizations is much more significant, and so the time requirement
now is i think a concern because i mean our primary reason for being here is to you know to get a degree and and so it's it's it's i know quite a few students struggle with um and it's so very easy to come consumed in your student organization and and just forget about forget about class because you're having so much fun well while you're
And in a lot of cases, you're just doing what you learned in class or you're applying what you learned in the classroom.
You still should be not forgetting about your classroom.
And so I think if students have an opportunity, I think if we could do a better job of marketing to the students about those opportunities,
I think we do a pretty good job of recruiting students who now, or students who come now wanting to be involved, but there is still this portion of the student body that does not want to be involved in all those kinds of things, and I think it's perfectly okay.
Because I'm assuming that the student who lives off campus
whether a local student who lives at home or an out-of-town student who lives in an apartment, that those students could easily be class attenders only.
And so it's to draw out those who want to be.
Can you think back of any...
You mentioned the gospel choir.
Can you think of any other specific event or incident that you could look back on and say, oh, that one helped to get me started?
Is there some advisor, some friend that said, come on?
This is interesting.
One day I was, I happened to be, I was reading the newspaper, reading the battalion.
And there was this announcement in the battalion about the new MSC president.
And I kept saying, okay, I don't understand this MSC president.
And the Black Awareness Committee is somehow related to this.
That day, I remember reading that paper, and let's see, the person that was selected was, it was Greg Hawkins, who had just been named MSC president.
And so I was, well, let me figure out what this MSC president stuff is all about.
That sounds like it could be a lot of fun.
It sounds like an opportunity for me to get involved in.
Okay, then all of my memories of high school started coming back.
Oh yeah, I love stuff like this.
And so I, in fact, asked other people, okay, what is, you know, and shortly thereafter, the rest of the council was announced.
And so I was really intrigued.
Well, who are all these people and where are they?
What are these positions?
And so that day, having seen the battalion, that really sparked my interest to get more involved or to look for an opportunity outside just the committee and thought, man, okay, this is something I can really do.
So that was another turning point for me in terms of student involvement.
And that curiosity led you to go over and... Led me to get much more interested in not just the committee, but the council.
And at that point, I made up my mind that I didn't know what council position, but I knew that I wanted a council position.
How did you make that known to somebody that mattered?
I did not for a very long time.
You just made it known to yourself.
I just made it known to myself.
And as I got more and more involved, I talked to one of the advisors, Arlene Mathey, who was the Black Awareness Committee advisor at that point, and then Charlie Walters was also our advisor.
And so I would ask them questions about, well, how do you get a position on council?
And what they said to me, well, what's really valuable if you want to be on the council is that you get some committee experience.
You know, being involved in more committees gives you additional visibility, you learn more about the organization, and the opportunity for you to be in a council role will come.
And so when one of my good college friends, Charnella Swanson, decided she was going to apply for the chairmanship for the Black Awareness Committee,
and she was named, I went to her and I said, I was very direct.
I went to her and said, okay, I want to be your number two person on your committee.
And she's like, well, I haven't decided how I want to structure.
And I said, well, okay, well, I'm not worried about that.
I want to be your number two person.
And so, this is really weird.
A couple of days later,
I went to her dorm room, and I forget what hall she lived in.
I went there very early in the morning.
In fact, she was not even up yet.
And I presented her with an organizational chart.
I said, I've been thinking about this Black Awareness Committee thing, and here's how I think, based on what you told me you wanted to get accomplished, here's how I think this structure might work.
And here's how I think it ought to look.
She did wake up and talk to me about it and just in a nice way told me to calm down and that there will be opportunity.
So when the opportunity came, literally she decided to create this new structure.
She changed it some.
She put her own flavor on it.
But there was this number two position.
And so I applied and interviewed.
It was an interview process with she and the advisor, and I was selected.
Now this was your sophomore year?
This would have been my sophomore year.
No, no, it was my junior year.
Because I was a fifth year senior when I became MSC president, council president.
That's your introduction to the kind of hierarchy.
Yes.
MSC director at this point, is that Jim Reynolds?
Jim Reynolds.
Wayne Starks already retired.
Wayne Starks retired.
Then move us on up.
Okay.
After that, we had a pretty phenomenal year with the Black Awareness Committee and at that point I also got involved with Fall Leadership Conference and did I get involved with Spring Leadership?
No, I did not get involved and got a lot more involved with Great Issues Committee.
When the next year came around, everybody assumed that I was going to apply for the chairmanship, or I should say a lot of people assumed I was going to apply for the chairmanship.
At that point, I was very interested in the council because I really managed a lot of our relationship, the committee's relationship with the council.
So I began to really
really figure out or really investigate processes.
So I knew what the program approval process was and I knew what role the council played.
And so I took responsibility for literally for kind of always having our presentations for council ready to go.
And so I decided that next year to apply for the VP for cultural programs.
No, no, I take that back.
I decided to apply for the executive vice president for administration.
So I was going to leapfrog the VP and do the executive VP.